The attached PDFs show plots of the development rates of males and
females of an insect at a range of temperatures.  The development rate
is simply the inverse of the number of days needed for development to
occur.  Entomologists are interested in the temperatures at which it
is too cold or too hot for development to occur, that is, when
development takes an infinite number of days.

Naturally, that can't be measured directly and so extrapolation is
necessary from the points that can be measured.  Fig 1 shows the
approach taken by Logan in 1976.  Despite the sparsity of points to
describe what happens after the turning point, it looks like a fairly
good indicator of the maximum temperature.  It is not useful at
indicating the lower temperature limit for obvious reasons.  Because
of that, the common practice was to use an extrapolation of the points
that formed a fairly linear relationship and use its intercept to
ascertain the lower limit.

Years later, Lactin, et al introduced a constant term which had the
effect of making the lower intercept more realisitic than the linear
one.  Fig 2 shows that approach in which the upper temperature
intercept is slightly less realistic than in Fig 1.  Fig 2a is the
same equation and though not biologically credible, I've included to
show what happens mathematically.

The equations at the top are simply calculated from the coefficients
listed in the small table.  Don't be surprised if you spot some
arithmetic errors in them on some of the plots.  At this stage, it's
not very important.


My first attempt at improving the approach was to add a term for the
minimum temperature as in Fig 3.  The value of Tmin is so close to
zero that it makes virtually no difference.  But dropping the constant
(lambda) does ridiculous things to the Tmax value (Fig 4 c.f. Fig 1).

My next attempt was to use different values of rho as in Fig 5.  It
comes up with values for Tmin which could make biological sense but
they bear little relationship to the intercept on the x axis.
Omitting the constant lambda gets even crazier (Fig 6).

I'm coming around to the idea that Fig 2 is probably as good as we're
likely to get.  I'm trying to get the entomologists into thinking
along the lines of a development rate something greater than zero
(maybe 1% of the maximum development rate) would make more biological
sense particularly at the minimum temperature.  It's low temperature
adaptation of most interest in this part of the world which is why I
was attempting to get Tmin into the expression.  Evidently, something
a bit more elaborate would be needed to get Tmin to correspond to zero
development.  It might be that the task is too difficult with such a
large amount of extrapolation required.


I've included files xxM and xxF which you can dget() into R dataframes
to play with.  For your purposes, there's probably nothing particularly
interesting about the difference between the male and female response
but I've included both in case that was of interest.  I've used them
like this:

nlxb(Dev ~ exp(rho * (T - Tmin)) -
     exp(rho * Tmax - (Tmax - T)/del), data = xxF,#
     lower = c(rho = .1, del = 2, Tmax = 28, Tmin = .2),
     upper = c(rho = 3, del = 18, Tmax = 40, Tmin = 14),
     start = c(rho = .13, del = 8, Tmax = 38, Tmin = 4.2))

and:

nlxb(Dev ~ exp(tau * (T - Tmin)) + lam -
     exp(rho*Tmax - (Tmax - T)/del), data = xxF, ## trace = TRUE, 
     lower = c(tau = .006, rho = .001, del = 3, Tmax = 28, Tmin = .2, lam = -5),
     upper = c(tau = 1.6, rho = 1.3, del = 11, Tmax = 39, Tmin = 6, lam = -.002),
     start = c(tau = .15, rho = .13, del = 4, Tmax = 30, Tmin = 4, lam = -4.5))

